Jehovah gave us the Bible so that we could know him and love him.
He wants us to become his friends.
Jehovah made sure that the Bible would be available,
no matter where people live or what language they speak.
The Bible Museum, located at the branch office of Jehovah's Witnesses in Brussels, Belgium,
with the theme, the Bible and the low countries,
tells the fascinating story of Bible translation and production in the coastal region of Northwestern Europe.
In this museum, you will learn of honest-hearted people who came to love the Bible
and wanted to make it available to others.
Throughout the Middle Ages, the Roman Catholic Church feared the spread of Bibles in vernacular languages.
Understanding the Bible would have exposed the unchristian behavior of the Church.
This led to cruel persecution of Bible translators.
What role did the region of the low countries play in this overheated religious atmosphere?
By the 16th century, the city of Antwerp, Belgium, had become the leading commercial center of Western Europe,
Antwerp's relatively tolerant religious and political climate,
made it an ideal hub for translating and printing Bibles in common everyday languages.
About 270 printers, publishers and booksellers were located in this cosmopolitan city.
In addition, the significant seaport was perfect for smuggling Bibles to neighboring countries.
One of the many printers working in Antwerp was Jakob van Lee's belt.
In 1526, he courageously published the first complete Bible in Dutch.
This was one of the first Bibles printed in a single volume.
Van Lee's belt eventually printed a total of 19 Bible editions.
Despite the comparatively safe working conditions in Antwerp,
Bible publishers were not fully protected from the Church.
Van Lee's belt was condemned to death for including marginal notes in his final edition of the Dutch Bible,
notes which the Catholic Church found offensive to their dogma.
He was one of several Antwerp Bible printers who were executed for their work.
A translator, who also published his work in Antwerp, was the French scholar Jacques Lafevre de Taple.
He dedicated himself to restoring the original meaning of ancient writings
and studied closely the Latin Volgate Bible.
He strongly believed in the right of every Christian to read and learn the Bible personally.
Therefore, the Fevre devoted all his energy to translating the Bible into French.
It was the first complete Bible to be printed in this language.
He was sure the Gospels would be, as he said, purely proclaimed throughout the world
so that people may no longer be led astray by alien doctrines of men.
Although his Bible translation initially was approved by the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V,
1546, the Fevre's second edition was placed on the Roman Catholic Church's index of forbidden books.
Another courageous man, one who translated the scriptures into English,
was a clergyman and a scholar of Greek and Latin.
The name of this man was William Tindale.
He was passionate about God's word.
Tindale wrote,
we must desire God to make us understand and feel wherefore the scripture was given
that we may apply the medicine of the scripture.
For translating the New Testament into English, he was chased and hunted by church and state.
He sought refuge in various cities, including the city of Antwerp.
Here, he published a revised version of the New Testament
and his translation of the Pentateuch, where he used Jehovah's name for the first time in an English translation.
Tindale also was executed for his translation work.
Publishing Bibles in Spain was a very dangerous undertaking.
For this reason, in 1543, the translator Francisco D'Anthinus had his New Testament in Spanish also printed in Antwerp.
It was the first Spanish version to be translated directly from the original Greek text.
He wrote,
it seemed to me that I had but one task to commit to the press the work I had taken pains to produce
and then commended to God the father of the whole business for whose cause it had been made.
Francisco D'Anthinus was also arrested for his work, yet some copies of his New Testament made it to Spain.
It had a strong influence on other Spanish translations, such as the widely known Reyna Valera Bible,
the first edition of which was also printed in the low countries.
There are many more intriguing gems for you to discover in this museum,
like the Antwerp Polyglot, which contains Bible text in five languages,
and the secretly produced Dutch Jehovah Bible, all printed in the low countries.
All these men displayed love for God's Word and Jehovah blessed their efforts
because the work that they did set in motion a series of events that have resulted in God's Word being available today in thousands of languages.
The Bible Museum in Belgium is one of our many museums around the world,
each highlighting unique aspects of the fascinating history of God's Word.
These exhibitions deepen our appreciation for the Bible,
and the truthfulness of 1 Peter 1, 25, where it says,
the saying of Jehovah and doers forever.